Update and expand theory sections (#3114)
ROCm/rocm-systems: projects/hip/docs/understand/programming_model.rst

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The device or kernel program acts as a worker on the GPU application, distributing operations to be handled quickly and efficiently. Launching a kernel in the host application starts the kernel program running on the GPU, defining the parallel operations that repeat the same instructions across many datasets. Understanding how the kernel works and the processes involved is essential to writing efficient GPU applications. Threads, blocks, and grids provide a hierarchical approach to parallel operations. Understanding the thread hierarchy is critical to distributing work across the available CUs, managing parallel operations, and optimizing memory access. The general flow of the kernel program looks like this:
```

  Interaction of Host and Device in a GPU application

HIP Runtime API
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The HIP Runtime API provides a high-level C-style interface that abstracts the
lower-level ROCr Runtime, simplifying GPU programming on AMD hardware. It offers
functions for memory management, kernel launches, synchronization, and device
control, enabling developers to write GPU-accelerated applications in a
portable, C++-friendly way.

The Runtime API serves the same role within ROCm as the CUDA Runtime API does
in NVIDIA's stack. It simplifies GPU programming by abstracting explicit device
and context management handled by the HSA/ROCr driver layer. Developers interact
with familiar, high-level constructs such as :cpp:func:`hipMalloc`,
:cpp:func:`hipMemcpy`, and ``hipLaunchKernelGGL``, while the runtime handles
resource allocation, queue management, and synchronization transparently.

> The Runtime API can be linked either statically or dynamically, with the shared
> object typically named ``libamdhip64.so`` on Linux systems. It is open-source
> and maintained as part of the ROCm ecosystem, allowing inspection, extension,
> and integration into custom build environments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Runtime API can be linked either statically or dynamically, with the shared
object typically named ``libamdhip64.so`` on Linux systems. It is open source
and maintained as part of the ROCm ecosystem, allowing inspection, extension,
and integration into custom build environments.
```

Hierarchical thread model
-------------------------

The thread hierarchy defines how parallel work is structured and executed across
AMD GPUs, from single threads up to the full device. All threads of a kernel are
uniquely identified by a set of integral values called thread IDs. The hierarchy
consists of three levels: threads, blocks, and grids.

* Threads are single instances of kernel operations, running concurrently
* Blocks group threads together and enable cooperation and shared memory
* Grids define the number of thread blocks for a single kernel launch

> * Blocks and grids can be defined in 3 dimensions (``x``, ``y``, ``z``)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Blocks and grids can be defined in three dimensions (``x``, ``y``, ``z``)
```

  Hierarchy of thread groups.

.. _work_item:

Thread (Work-item)
  The smallest unit of execution in the HIP programming model is a thread, also

>   called a work-item in lower-level documentation such as AMDGPU ISA manuals and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  called a work item in lower-level documentation such as AMDGPU ISA manuals and
```

  HSA specifications. Each thread represents an independent control flow with
  its own registers and program counter.
  
  Threads execute the same kernel function independently, with identifiers such
  as ``threadIdx.x`` and ``blockIdx.x`` that determine which portion of data the

>   thread operates on within its work-group and grid. For example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Threads execute the same kernel function independently, using identifiers such
  as ``threadIdx.x`` and ``blockIdx.x`` that determine which portion of data the
  thread operates on within its work group and grid. For example:
```

  
  .. code-block:: cuda
  
    int tid = threadIdx.x;
    int bid = blockIdx.x;
    int global_idx = tid + bid * blockDim.x;
  

>   Each thread maintains its own register state, including vector general-purpose
>   registers (VGPRs), and a private program counter. Threads have private storage
>   for local variables, spilled registers, and function call stacks, which reside
>   in global memory when on-chip register limits are exceeded. High-performance
>   kernels minimize this usage to keep data in registers or :ref:`Local Data
>   Share (LDS) <lds>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Each thread maintains its own register state, including vector general-purpose
  registers (VGPRs), and a private program counter. Threads have private storage
  for local variables, spilled registers, and function call stacks, which reside
  in global memory when on-chip register limits are exceeded. High-performance
  kernels minimize this usage by keeping data in registers or :ref:`Local Data
  Share (LDS) <lds>`.
```

  
  A single SIMD lane executes the instructions for one thread at a time. Since
  each CU contains multiple SIMD units, thousands of threads can execute
  concurrently across the GPU. From a programmer's perspective, a thread is the
  fundamental unit of GPU computation, analogous to a CPU thread but scaled to

>   tens of thousands of instances operating in parallel.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  A single SIMD lane executes the instructions for one thread at a time. Because
  each CU contains multiple SIMD units, thousands of threads can execute
  concurrently across the GPU. From a programmer's perspective, a thread is the
  fundamental unit of GPU computation, analogous to a CPU thread but scaled to
  tens of thousands of instances operating in parallel.
```

  architecture-specific and described in the hardware implementation  
  documentation. 
  
  When a wavefront issues an instruction whose operands are not yet ready, for
  instance, a global memory load from :ref:`HBM <hbm>`, it becomes stalled.
  Rather than idling, the wavefront scheduler selects another ready wavefront to
  execute. This rapid context switching hides memory and instruction latency and
  is key to achieving high utilization.
  
  To keep the compute units busy, you should maximize occupancy, the number of
  resident wavefronts per CU, ensuring there is always at least one eligible
  wavefront ready to issue instructions. The ratio of active issue cycles to
  total cycles is known as issue efficiency.

.. _inherent_thread_hierarchy_block:

Block (Work-group)
  The next level of the thread hierarchy is called a thread block (or work-group
  in OpenCL terminology). A block is a collection of wavefronts that can
  synchronize and share local data share (LDS) memory. The defining feature of a
  block is that all threads in the block have shared memory that they can use to
  share data or synchronize with one another, as described in
  :ref:`memory_hierarchy`.
  

>   All wavefronts of a block execute on the same compute unit, ensuring they can

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  All wavefronts of a block execute on the same CU, ensuring they can
```

  portions of input data. The scheduling of work-groups is handled dynamically by
  the GPU driver and hardware scheduler, distributing them across available
  compute units. Execution order is non-deterministic, work-groups may execute
  concurrently or in arbitrary order depending on hardware availability and
  resource usage.
  
  Work-groups within a grid cannot synchronize directly through barriers, since
  they may execute on different CUs. Instead, they coordinate via global memory,
  often using atomic operations or device-wide synchronization mechanisms. The
  kernel itself returns only after all work-groups in the grid have finished
  execution.
  
  This grid-level abstraction allows a single kernel launch to scale
  transparently with GPU size: larger GPUs simply execute more work-groups
  concurrently, while smaller GPUs schedule them in more waves.
  
  The grid is specified when launching a kernel and determines:
  
  * Total number of threads: ``grid_size`` × ``block_size``
  * Distribution of work across compute units
  * Overall parallelism of the computation
  
  The unique ID of each block within a grid can be 1, 2, or 3-dimensional, as

>   provided by the API and is queryable by every thread within the block through

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  provided by the API, and is accessible to every thread in the block through
```

  *occupancy* of the CU as described in
  :doc:`Compute Units <./hardware_implementation>`, an important concept in
  resource usage and performance optimization.

  Use registers when the data is specific to a thread. This includes temporary
  variables, loop counters, and intermediate results that don't need to be
  shared across threads. Registers provide the lowest latency access for
  thread-specific data.

Shared memory
  Read-write storage visible to all the threads in a given block.
  
  Shared memory corresponds to the :ref:`Local Data Share (LDS) <lds>`, a fast,
  on-chip SRAM region within each compute unit's L1 cache subsystem. LDS
  provides low-latency, programmer-managed shared memory that enables efficient
  coordination and reuse of data.
  
  A typical high-performance kernel follows this pattern:
  
  * Load data from global memory into LDS
  * Perform arithmetic operations using SIMD or :ref:`Matrix Cores (MFMA units)
    <mfma_units>`
  * Synchronize threads within the work-group via barrier instructions
  * Write results back to global memory, optionally using atomics for
    inter-work-group coordination
  

>   Each compute unit provides a fixed amount of LDS (the size depending on the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  Each CU provides a fixed amount of LDS (the size depending on the
```

avoiding additional device-side transposes that would harm performance.

Integration with HIP applications
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

rocBLAS integrates with HIP applications through a handle-based API. The library
manages its own stream-based execution model, coordinating with HIP's
asynchronous operations:

.. code-block:: cpp

   rocblas_handle handle;
   rocblas_create_handle(&handle);
   
   // Optional: associate with HIP stream
   rocblas_set_stream(handle, hipStream);
   
   // Perform computation
   rocblas_sgemm(handle, ...);
   
   // Synchronize if needed
   hipStreamSynchronize(hipStream);
   
   rocblas_destroy_handle(handle);

Applications link against ``librocblas.so`` and include ``rocblas.h``. The
library serves as the foundation for deep learning frameworks such as PyTorch
and TensorFlow when running on AMD GPUs, handling dense matrix operations in
fully connected and transformer layers.

Deep learning with MIOpen
--------------------------

MIOpen provides GPU-accelerated primitives for deep neural networks, offering a
programming model centered on neural network operations rather than explicit

> kernels. It occupies the same software layer as rocBLAS but specializes in deep

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
kernels. It occupies the same software layer as rocBLAS but is specialized for deep
```
